Vol. 18 No. 5 November 1999

Journal of Pain and Symptom Management

353

Original Article

Homeopathic Prophylaxis of Headaches and
Migraine? A Systematic Review
Edzard Ernst, MD, PhD, FRCP (Edin)
Department of Complementary Medicine, School of Postgraduate Medicine and Health Sciences,
University of Exeter, Exeter, United Kingdom

Abstract
Homeopathy is often advocated as a prophylaxis of migraine and headaches. The aim of this
systematic review was to evaluate the clinical trials, testing the efficacy of homeopathy for these
indications. Independent computerized literature searches were carried out in 4 databases.
Only randomized, placebo-controlled trials were included. Four such studies were found. Their
methodological quality was variable but, on average, satisfactory. One study suggested that
homeopathic remedies were effective. The other, methodologically stronger trials did not support
this notion. It is concluded that the trial data available to date do not suggest that
homeopathy is effective in the prophylaxis of migraine or headache beyond a placebo effect.
J Pain Symptom Manage 1999;18:353–357. © U.S. Cancer Pain Relief Committee, 1999.
Key Words
Homeopathy, complementary medicine, clinical trials, systematic review, efficacy

Introduction
For about 200 years, homeopathy has remained a much-debated subject. It is based essentially on two assumptions. First, if a given
remedy causes a symptom in a healthy volunteer, the remedy can be used to treat the symptom in patients who suffer from it (the “like
cures like” principle). Second, if a remedy is
diluted and succussed (shaken), a process
termed potentiation by homeopaths, it will not
become less but more potent (law of infinitesimal dilutions). Thus even nonmaterial solutions are thought to be clinically effective. Both

Address reprint requests to: Dr. E. Ernst, Department of
Complementary Medicine, School of Postgraduate
Medicine and Health Sciences, University of Exeter,
25 Victoria Park Road, Exeter EX2 4NT, UK.
Accepted for publication: January 19, 1999.
© U.S. Cancer Pain Relief Committee, 1999
Published by Elsevier, New York, New York

principles create problems for rational thinkers but the latter flies in the face of science,
which, of course, insists that where there is no
molecule there can be no action.1
Even though homeopaths do not adopt disease entities equivalent to those in conventional medicine (i.e., they claim to treat the individual, not the disease), most texts suggest
that headaches will respond favorably to homeopathic treatments and recommend its use
for that indication.2,3 Likewise, there is no
shortage of anecdotal reports implying that homeopathy alleviates such conditions.4 Throughout the history of homeopathy, skeptics have
attributed such outcomes to the placebo effect.1 In order to define whether or not homeopathic remedies are effective beyond a placebo response, this systematic review is aimed
at evaluating the data from randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind trials. The particular research question addressed here can
be formulated as follows: are homeopathic
0885-3924/99/$–see front matter
PII S0885-3924(99)00095-0

354

remedies more effective than placebos in the
prevention of migraine or headaches?

Methods
Computerized literature searches were performed to identify all randomized, placebocontrolled double-blind clinical trials of homeopathic treatments for migraine or headache.
Databases included: Medline, Embase, CISCOM,
and the Cochrane Library (all from their inception to August 1998). The references of two
systematic reviews5,6 were also considered. The
author had been involved in an extensive literature search and meta-analysis commissioned
by the European Union.7 This exercise included extensive hand-searching of 28 specialized homeopathic journals and resulted in the
identification of more than 400 publications.
This material was also screened for the purpose of this review. Furthermore, our own extensive files as well as review articles and books
on homeopathy were searched for further relevant publications. The bibliographies of the
publications thus retrieved were searched for
further trials. There were no restrictions regarding the language of publication.
Initially a broad search for homeopathic trials was conducted. As a next step, it was focused exclusively on prevention trials. Only
randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind
clinical trials were included in this systematic
review. Trials of one homeopathic potency
against another, or trials of homeopathy versus
other types of treatment were excluded.
All studies were read in full. Data were extracted in a standardized, predefined fashion
(Table 1). Methodological quality of the included trials was assessed using the score according to Jadad.8 The results of each trial
were taken as published and no reevaluation
was attempted.

Results
Four studies were found which met the
above inclusion/exclusion criteria.9–12 No trials
for the treatment of acute headache or migraine were located. Data extraction could be
performed from all randomized controlled trials (RCTs). The key data of all included studies
are summarized in Table 1.

Ernst

Vol. 18 No. 5 November 1999

Brigo and Serpelloni9 randomized 60 patients with migraine into groups A and B. The
authors do not describe their exact diagnostic
criteria of migraine. All patients received single doses of oral treatments at 2-week intervals.
In group A, this was a choice of 6 homeopathic
remedies which were individually prescribed
according to the “like cures like” principle at
the (nonmaterial) 30C potency. The remedies
were: Belladonna, Cyclamen, Gelsemium, Ignatia, Lachesis, Natrium, Muriaticum, Silicea,
and Sulfur. Patients who did not correspond to
the “drug pictures” of these remedies were excluded from the study. Group B was given placebos. The therapeutic success was evaluated at
weeks 8 and 16 through patient diaries. The results are significantly in favor of homeopathy
for all outcome variables: frequency, severity,
duration of pain, and concomitant analgesic
consumption. The frequency of migraine attacks fell from 9.9 to 7.9 per month in the placebo and from 10.0 to 1.8 in the homeopathic
group. The pain intensity, measured by visual
analogue scale, fell from 8.4 to 7.8 and 9.1 to
2.9 respectively. The main weakness of this
study is the lack of an accurate patient definition. Furthermore, it is possible that a degree
of “de-blinding” inadvertently took place.
Straumsheim et al.10 randomized 73 patients
into groups A and B. Sixty-eight patients concluded the study. After a 1 month run-in period, group A was prescribed individualized
remedies (choice of 60 remedies in 3 different
potencies), whereas group B received indistinguishable placebos for 4 months. Clinical outcome was evaluated through patient diaries
and neurologist assessment. There were no significant intergroup differences in terms of frequency, intensity, duration of attacks, or analgesic consumption. However, attack frequency
was significantly lower in the homeopathic
group when assessed by the neurologist (P ϭ
0.04). The weakness of this latter result is that
the physicians’ rating of attack frequency may
be unreliable. Furthermore, this difference
barely reached the level of statistical significance.
Whitmarsh and colleagues11 randomized 63
patients with migraine according to International Headache Society (IHS) criteria in
group A or B. Both groups received placebo
for a 1-month run-in period. Thereafter, group
A was individually prescribed one of 11 reme-

63 (4)

63 (3)

98 (5)

Straumsheim10 (1997)

Whitmarsh11 (1997)

Walach12 (1997)

n.m. ϭ not mentioned.

60 (2)

Sample size
(Jadad score)

Brigo9 (1991)

Reference

Migraine or
tension
headache

Migraine
according to
IHS criteria

Migraine
according to
IHS criteria

“Migraine”
not further
defined

Description of
patients

Choice of 11 remedies
(all 30C) prescribed
individually, 2 tablets
twice weekly for
3 months
Free choice of
individualized
remedies for
12 weeks

Four single doses of 30C
potencies of a choice
of 6 remedies given
orally in 2-week
intervals
Choice of 60 remedies
in D30, D200, and 1M
potencies prescribed
individually at monthly
consultations with
homeopathic

Homeopathic
treatments

6 withdrawals

3

Of 73 pts 68
completed
the study

n.m.

Dropouts

12 weeks

4 months

5 months

16 weeks

Follow-up

Table 1
Homeopathic Trials in Migraine and Headaches

Primary outcome
variables ϭ frequency,
severity, and duration
of attacks

Primary outcome
variable ϭ attack
frequency
(patient diary)

As above plus
neurologist’s
assessment

Frequency, intensity,
duration of attacks,
and use of analgesic
drugs (patient diary)

Outcome
variables

Improvements in both
groups, no intergroup
difference

No intergroup differences
in terms of frequency,
intensity, or duration of
attacks nor analgesic
consumption. Only sign
(P ϭ 0.05) of difference ϭ
neurologist’s assessment
of attack frequency
Homeopath ϭ Ϫ19%
placebo ϭ Ϫ16%
no sign of intergroup
difference

Compared to placebo,
significant improvement
in all variables

Results

Vol. 18 No. 5 November 1999
Homeopathy for Headaches and Migraine
355

356

dies: Belladonna, Bryonia, Iris Vesiculor, Kalium Bichromatium, Lachesis, Natrium Muriaticum, Nux Vomica, Sanguinaria, Sepia, Silicea,
or Sulphur—all in 30C potencies. Patients
were instructed to take two tablets twice weekly
for 3 months. Group B received indistinguishable placebos. Attack frequency had been defined as the primary endpoint. It showed a significant difference between groups already at
entry (P ϭ 0.0013). During the treatment
phase, frequency declined in both groups without a significant intergroup difference. Secondary outcome variables (e.g., analgesic consumption) also showed no significant difference
between groups. The interpretation of this trial
is hampered by the baseline differences of the
primary endpoint. This could have been
avoided by stratification.
Walach and colleagues12 randomized 98 patients in group A or B. Seventy-six percent of
these patients suffered from migraine and 51%
had tension-type headaches. After a 6-week
run-in phase, group A received individualized
homeopathic remedies (free choice of type
and potency) while group B received indistinguishable placebos. Treatment lasted for 12
weeks. Headache frequency, intensity, and duration were the predefined outcome variables.
Many patients (of both groups) improved but
according to the intention-to-treat analysis,
there were no significant intergroup differences in any of the variables. This study profits
from thoughtful design and exemplary statistical planning and evaluation.

Discussion
The overall result of this systematic review
suggests that homeopathic remedies are not
superior to placebo in preventing migraine or
headache. The paucity of trials is disappointing
and limits the validity of this statement. The average methodological quality of the studies is
satisfactory; in particular, the study by Walach12
was excellent. The latter author went to extreme pains in attempting to exclude bias. For
instance, a committee of homeopaths had to
reach a consensus as to the ideal homeopathic
prescription in each case and a notary surveyed
randomization and blinding in this trial. By
contrast, the Italian study9 is methodologically
weak. This is perhaps best exemplified by the
authors’ statement that the objective of their

Ernst

Vol. 18 No. 5 November 1999

trial was to “demonstrate” (rather than test)
the efficacy of homeopathy. Failure to perform
proper power calculations is a further flaw
which this trial9 shares with all the others, except for the best methodological study.12 This
could have resulted in a type II error.
Thus, the significance of the two positive
trials9,11 is debatable. These studies were clearly
the weakest from a methodological point of
view. Their flaws range from poor patient definition and a lack of adequate statistical
evaluation9 to small sample size and soft primary endpoints.10 In view of these weaknesses,
it is important to point out that the most rigorous study12 does not support the hypothesis of
a specific effect caused by the administered homeopathic remedies.
In their meta-analysis of all randomized or
placebo-controlled clinical trials of homeopathy, Linde et al. concluded “the results . . . are
not compatible with the hypothesis that the
clinical effects of homeopathy are completely
due to placebo.”6 However, the authors were
unable to identify a single indication for which
homeopathy was convincingly effective and reanalysis of their data, using stricter entry criteria and only studies with nonmaterial remedies, concluded that “homeopathic remedies
are associated with the same clinical effects as
placebo.”13
The pooling of data from clinical trials on
entirely different disease entities is problematic and Linde et al have been criticized for
this approach.14 It may be more appropriate
therefore to focus on specific conditions when
assessing the efficacy of homeopathy. The two
conditions that have been submitted to most
clinical trials are postoperative ileus and delayed-onset muscle soreness. We have assessed
these data by systematic review15 and metaanalysis.16 In the latter case, the overall result
was positive, albeit burdened with several caveats. In the former case it was negative. Finally,
we have conducted systematic reviews of all
comparative homeopathic trials (i.e., studies
where homeopathic remedies were compared
to orthodox treatments)17 and of all trials of
homeopathic Arnica.18 In both cases, the results were not in favor of homeopathy.
The disappointing results of the present systematic review could mean that either homeopathy was used inadequately (which would inevitably lead to a negative finding, even with an

Vol. 18 No. 5 November 1999

Homeopathy for Headaches and Migraine

effective drug) or that homeopathic remedies
prescribed in these trials are not more effective
than placebos. One could argue that long
treatment periods are required for the homeopathic therapy of long-standing problems like
migraine/headaches to respond. Thus, treatment of 12 months might indeed have been
suboptimal in the otherwise most conclusive
trial.12 However, the only study which incorporated a substantially longer treatment phase
(i.e., 5 months) also produced a negative result. On balance, therefore, the results of this
systematic review favor the second of the above
two interpretations.
In conclusion, this systematic review has not
produced compelling evidence to suggest that
individualized homeopathic treatment is more
effective than placebo in the prevention of
migraine or headache attacks. However, due to
several caveats (e.g., paucity of RCTs) it seems
premature to make final judgment on this
matter.

References
1. Ernst E. Homoeopathy: past, present, future. Br
J Clin Pharmacol 1997;44:435–437.
2. Gemmell D. Everyday homoeopathy. Beaconsfield, UK: Beaconsfield Pub., 1987.
3. Cooper D. Migraine: a homoeopathic approach.
Br Homoeopathic J 1984;73:1–10.
4. Khalsa D. An efficacious homoeopathic treatment for acute migraine headache. Biomed Therapy 1998;15:223–224.
5. Kleijnen J, Knipschild P, ter Riet G. Clinical trials of homeopathy. Br Med J 1991;302:316–332.
6. Linde K, Clausius N, Ramirez G, Melchart D, Eitel F, Hedges LV, Jonas W. Are the clinical effects of

357

homeopathy placebo effects? A meta-analysis of placebo-controlled trials. Lancet 1997;350:834–843.
7. Boissel JP, Ernst E, Fisher P, Fülgraff G, Garatini
S, deLange de Klerk E. Overview of data from homeopathic medicine trials. European Union Report,
1996.
8. Jadad AR, Moore RA, Carrol D, Jenkinson C,
Reynolds DJM, Gavaghan DJ, McQuay HJ. Assessing
the quality of reports of randomized clinical trials: is
blinding necessary? Contr Clin Trials 1996;17:1–12.
9. Brigo B, Serpelloni G. Homoeopathic treatment
of migraines: a randomized double-blind controlled
study of sixty cases (homoeopathic remedy versus
placebo). Berlin J Res Homoeopathy 1991;1:98–106.
10. Straumsheim PA, Brochgrevink C, Mowinckel P,
Kierulf H, Hafslund Ø. Homoeopathic treatment of
migraine: a double-blind placebo controlled trial of
68 patients. Dynamis 1997;2:18–22.
11. Whitmarsh TE, Coleston-Shields DM, Steiner
TJ. Double-blind randomized placebo-controlled
study of homoeopathic prophylaxis of migraine.
Cephalalgia 1997;17:600–604.
12. Walach H, et al. Classical homeopathic treatment of chronic headaches. Cephalalgia 1997;17:
119–126.
13. Ernst, E. Are highly dilute homoeopathic remedies placebos? Perfusion 1998;11:291–292.
14. Vandenbrouk JP. Homoeopathy trials, going nowhere. Lancet 1997;350:824.
15. Ernst E, Barnes J. Are homoeopathic remedies
effective for delayed-onset muscle soreness? A systematic review of placebo-controlled trials. Perfusion 1998;11:4–8.
16. Barnes J, Resch KL, Ernst E. Homoeopathy for
post-operative ileus: a meta-analysis. J Clin Gastroent
1997;25:628–633.
17. Ernst E. Comparative trials of classical homoeopathy: a systematic review. Perfusion 1999;12:13–15.
18. Ernst E, Pittler MH. The efficacy of homoeopathic
Arnica: a systematic review of placebo-controlled
clinical trials. Arch Surgery 1998;133:1187–1190.

